Hi.
Welcome to session 508, Understanding and
Optimizing Web Graphics,
or as I actually wanted to call it,
Pretty Pictures with Dean.
But marketing with their so-called rules
said that that's not-- So I am Dean,
represented in this image by the
little girl standing with the
red bow ties somehow on water.
Okay, web graphics.
So we're pretty familiar with, I think,
with what graphics on the web are today.
Websites are very highly designed.
They use a lot of imagery.
They're creating a particular brand.
They're very stylized.
There's some types of images
that react to the user somehow.
There's even some images where
there's some kind of animation
just giving you an ambient feel.
Wait a minute.
OK.
But it wasn't always like that.
In fact,
here's a screenshot of the world's
first web browser written by
Tim Berners-Lee in the early '90s.
And we'll notice I think
two cool things about it.
One is that it was written on a Next,
which is the precursor to OS X.
But also, probably more importantly,
even though it's a
graphical user interface,
the actual web content,
which is mostly down in the
bottom right-hand corner,
it's just plain text.
There's different text styles.
There's bold and there's different sizes.
But the text is just plain.
Now, at this time,
there were other technologies
that were competing with the web,
such as Gopher and Wase, and they, too,
were text-based systems.
And there was something that happened
to the web that really made it kick off.
And one of the things was the image tag.
And this was added in 1993
to the Mosaic browser.
And you can still read the
proposal online because,
in fact, it's -- in fact,
the same tag that we're using today.
And it -- this allowed the author
to have -- to point to a raster
image file and embed it inline.
Now, users absolutely loved this feature.
They started putting images everywhere.
The Mosaic browser became popular,
and web took off for
this and other reasons.
So when we talk about images on the web,
one of the ones probably the most
familiar with is photographs.
And in fact,
photographs aren't that interesting
because they're pretty much the same
type of image that was enabled in 1993.
Most people in the world nowadays
know what a JPEG file is.
What we've done since then is
invented entirely new technologies
to enable different types of imagery.
An example is maps.
Previously, a map on the web was pretty
much the same as a paper map.
It was just a static image.
Now, maps, we can pinch and zoom.
We can overlay different layers,
see directions.
Similarly to maps, we've got charts.
Now, these are interesting
because as an image,
they convey more data in a visual
form than would be possibly
cumbersome to describe in text.
Similar to charts, we have diagrams.
So I'm not an American.
I think this is some form
of religious diagram.
But the idea is here,
the image itself is representing
the relationship between objects.
And the colors and the size.
And we can take it a step further and
add another dimension to the image.
We're adding animation.
And so now we show how the
graphic changes over time,
and that's giving more data to the user.
And there's one last
type of image on the web,
and that's games.
Millions of people spend millions of
hours a day playing games on the web.
And we actually call these games video
games because they are visual things.
They're drawing lots of images.
They're very interactive.
And because of that,
they're very exciting.
So these are the types of
images that we're talking about,
or imagery we're talking about today.
So there's two technologies
invented in the last few years that
really form the basis of this talk.
The first one is HTML canvas,
and the second one is SVG.
And this is what we're going to talk
about for the remainder of the session.
Now you might be asking, well,
these technologies have
been around for a while.
Why are you talking about them now?
And I think there's three main reasons.
The first one is resolution.
So we've got now devices with
massive screens and powerful
graphics processors that can decode,
say, four high-definition
video streams at once.
We also got smaller devices or
devices with smaller screens.
Now the interesting thing here
is you might have a user that's
pinched to zoom into your image,
and they might be viewing
it on the 3.5-inch screen
of an iPhone or iPod touch.
But they're in fact seeing a higher
resolution version of your image.
And they would on a desktop browser.
So resolution independence in
graphics formats is very important.
If we just consider the
iOS family of devices,
in the keynote on Monday,
it was mentioned there's
now 200 million iOS devices,
and none of these support
Flash or any other plugin.
So if you're an author and you want
to produce interactive graphics,
you need to use a technology
that's both supported on iOS,
and you want to, of course,
enable it for other users,
other browsers.
And the answer here is HTML5.
It provides these technologies.
It's an open standard.
It's giving you some future proof that
you know that the other vendors are
going to implement the same technology.
Now there's one, there's a third,
there's a third point,
and the third point is actually
so cool and I'm excited about it,
I'm not going to talk about it,
we're just going to show you.
So I'm going to swap to...
Now this is an iPad running--
iPad 2 running iOS 4.3.
So I'm going to just launch this--
This is a demo I wrote,
and it's just exercising
the canvas element.
You can see it's sort of got
five different types of tests.
One's drawing rectangles.
We've got some shapes that
are stroked and filled.
We're scaling some images.
We're doing 2D transforms on rectangles,
and we're doing some image compositing.
Now,
we're getting 17 frames a second here.
The graphics look great,
but there's sort of some restrictions
with that level of performance that,
you know, people are writing great web
apps that use these technologies,
but it could be a little bit better.
So now I'm going to swap to the
same hardware running iOS 5.0.
Okay, so same hardware.
Got to run the same test.
And this time --
So about 70 frames,
about four and a bit times faster.
Now, this is on the same hardware,
and it's in iOS 5.
Cool.
So those three things: resolution, HTML5,
and performance, are the reasons we're
talking about graphics today.
So what are we going to cover?
We're going to cover the basic
concepts of Canvas and SVG,
how to draw shapes.
We're going to add some interaction
-- animation and interactivity.
And we're going to finish with
some tips and special effects.
So let's start with the basic concepts.
The HTML5 Canvas element.
So the way I think of Canvas is that
it's actually like an image tag,
but it's blank.
And instead of pointing the
source element at a raster
file to get the pixels,
you, in fact,
have a JavaScript API and you control
what the pixels in the element is.
One thing to note about the
Canvas is this JavaScript API,
which we'll get into in a minute,
every drawing command is immediately
rendered into the Canvas.
So if you're familiar with doing
animations and things in -- in
-- in the -- in the JavaScript,
you know, you can actually do that.
You can do that in the JavaScript.
So you can do that in the JavaScript.
So if you're familiar with
doing animations and things
in -- in the JavaScript,
you can do that in the JavaScript.
So if you're familiar with
doing animations and things
in -- in the JavaScript,
you can do that in the JavaScript.
So if you're familiar with
doing animations and things in
HTML content where if you have a
development and you move it about,
the browser's got to take
charge of redrawing it.
In Canvas, if you draw something in one
place and you want to move it,
you actually possibly have to
erase it from that new location
and draw your entire scene again.
How do you use canvas?
Well, it's just a regular HTML element.
So here I've got a canvas element,
and I've given it a width and a height,
and it's just a rectangular
region in the page.
So this bit's so boring,
let's actually start using it.
So I wanted to draw something
that's fairly easy but recognizable.
So let's draw the HTML5 logo.
Now, if you look at this logo,
it's in fact three
different shapes at once.
So there's a background,
there's a shield,
which is the orange background.
There's a white shape
that's shaped to be,
looks like a five.
And then what looks here like a gray
polygon is in fact a white polygon
that's partially transparent so that
when you draw them on top of each other,
you get this highlight effect.
So let's draw this shape.
I'm going to start by having a canvas
that's 512 pixels in each dimension.
I could have picked any size.
Now, the first thing I want to do is I've
got to get this API that I talked about,
which is the HTML5 canvas element.
And I'm going to do that
by using the HTML5 element.
So the object,
the JavaScript object that you
issue the drawing commands on.
So I've got a reference
to my canvas element,
and I call the get context
with a parameter of 2D.
And that gives me the,
what we call the context of,
I've got the variable CTX here.
Once I've got that context,
I probably want to erase
what was already there.
Like I said,
something might have drawn into it,
some previous frame of what I've drawn.
I'm going to erase what's there
and I just clear all the pixels.
Now I want to draw this shape.
Now the way we draw shapes in
Canvas is we first define geometry,
and then once we've got that geometry,
issue the actual drawing commands.
So I start by declaring that I'm going to
now start giving you geometry commands,
beginning a path.
And then I define the five
points in the path of the shield.
So I start at the point 71, 460,
then I move up to 30, 0,
and so on around.
Finally, I'm going to close the path,
which is going to draw a straight line
from the last point to the end point,
sorry, the last point to the first point.
Now I've got the geometry,
I'm going to actually
issue the drawing commands.
The first thing I set the fill style
to be the particular shade of orange.
And then I call fill.
And Canvas goes and fills in
that shape with the orange color.
Drawing the five is very similar.
I'm starting a new geometry, a new path,
begin path.
I add all the points.
There's a few more of them here,
so I haven't listed them all.
In the end,
I set the fill style to be almost white,
a slightly bright gray,
and then call fill,
and we get the five on top.
The highlight is again very similar.
Start the geometry, begin path,
define the outline.
And here,
it's something slightly different
is that because I wanted to
draw a transparent color,
I set my fill style to be
RGB white that's 30% opaque.
So how are you going to use that?
You've got the object now.
You've drawn into Canvas.
Well,
I already mentioned that it could be
just an element already in the page.
That's pretty simple.
There's another way to use
Canvas in WebKit in Safari,
and that's via CSS.
So let's say anywhere you
can use an image in CSS,
such as background image or border image,
you can set your property
value to be WebKit Canvas,
and you give a name
for that Canvas object.
And this gives you a canvas that's not
actually part of the content of the page,
but it's kind of like an off-screen
buffer that you can draw into.
So I've defined the WebKit Canvas,
and then somewhere else in my JavaScript,
I call document getCssCanvasContext 2D,
and I use that same ID,
the name that I used in my CSS,
and I give it a size.
And then I've got this context
object that I can draw into,
and it immediately goes
into the CSS engine.
So we drew that logo,
and if we look at it,
it's a fair bit of code.
Most of it's the geometry,
but embedded in there, mixed in,
is some styling commands or whatever.
It's all JavaScript.
It might be slightly
hard to maintain that,
especially if you're not a programmer.
So we're going to look at
how similar technology,
SVG, would have done the same thing.
So SVG,
it's a markup format for graphics.
The way I like to think of it is
it's kind of like HTML for graphics.
So instead of having P paragraphs
and heading elements,
you've got circles and rectangles.
This makes it really human
readable and easy to edit by hand.
It's vector based.
So what that means is that
instead of actually drawing,
ultimately it's going
to end up with pixels,
but you are defining the sort of
parameters to the shapes that you want,
and the browser's going to
take care of the rendering.
It's going to render the object at
the best resolution possible for
whatever zoom factor the user might be.
Lastly,
it actually has a lot of tool support.
It's been around for a while.
It's an open standard,
and there's some commercial tools like
the Adobe Suite that export to SVG,
and there's a whole bunch of open source
tools that edit and export to SVG.
So how do we do it?
An SVG is a file format just like HTML,
and HTML starts with an HTML tag.
SVG starts with an SVG tag,
and you put your content in between.
Very simple.
There is one little difference in that,
remember we said that SVG is
resolution independent.
It means that the browser's got to
take care of how big it's rendered,
but within the actual content itself,
we need to give a hint to
the system as to what type of
coordinate system we're looking at.
So in this case,
I've added a viewpox attribute,
and what I said is this SVG assumes
that I'm drawing in a sort of
arbitrary viewport of starts at zero
zero and is 512 pixels high and wide.
So let's start.
So there's my SVG viewport.
And I'm going to add a polygon.
And a polygon is actually
just a polygon tag.
And it has an attribute fill.
So in this case, I've got the tag name,
then what I call a styling attribute.
So it says the fill color to
be this particular orange.
And then the other attribute
on the element is--
is the points, and that's giving you the
space-separated list of x,
y pairs that define the
geometry of the shape.
The HTML5 logo is very similar.
Again, a little bit more points,
but I've said fill to
be that bright gray.
And now we're just mentioning
that SVG draws in document order.
So if I put the orange polygon in
the document before the white five,
then they get a render
in the right order.
Otherwise, the five would be obscured.
The last highlight again is very simple.
It's another polygon.
The difference here is I could have
used an RGBA color like I did in canvas,
but instead I said I want
the fill color to be white,
and I set another property opacity
to be 30%. And there's the logo.
Okay, so that's the entire
file for that graphic.
What's great about that is that just
that amount of code gives you an image
that could be drawn at any scale.
It could be used, you know,
10 pixels by 10 pixels or a million
pixels by a million pixels zoomed in.
The total file size
It's 497 bytes.
And that's actually uncompressed.
When you send it over
HTTP with GZIP compression,
you're at 272 bytes.
That's probably smaller than
most HTML head elements.
So you can use it as an image element.
The way it takes a JPEG or a PNG file,
you can also point at an SVG file
and it'll render the SVG file.
Also in CSS,
you can use an SVG file anywhere.
Again, you would use an image in CSS such
as borders or backgrounds.
There's one important thing to mention
when you're using it in CSS is,
again, SVG doesn't really have
a resolution itself,
so you have to tell the CSS engine
how big you want that file to be
rendered when you're using it.
So in this case, I set a background size.
There's a new way to use SVG which is
enabled in Safari Online and on iOS 5,
and that is you can actually
embed SVG inline within HTML.
In this case,
it's very similar to the canvas element.
I just put the SVG file in and it's
a rectangular region on the page,
and then my SVG content goes in between.
So we have that file,
but there's something probably
missing if we're web authors,
and that is we've been taught
for years to separate our
sort of styling from our data.
And this isn't doing it,
sort of mixing it all in one.
So we can actually have
another pass at this file.
It's hard to read,
so I'll just make it full screen,
and I'm going to highlight
the bits that have changed.
So instead of all these fill attributes,
I've instead put CSS class
attributes on the element.
So there's the shield, the five,
and the highlight.
And then I've added a style element,
and I've added the CSS for
those three things.
I could have equally had it as a
link to an external style sheet.
Now, the great thing here is that if
I take this very simple style rule
and change it to something like this,
I've highlighted the changes,
we can take that same graphic
and produce a dramatically
different visual appearance.
You haven't changed the
coordinates in any way.
You've just changed the style sheet.
So you could, in fact,
have the same graphic styled by different
parts of your website or different
media queries for different things.
different devices just through CSS.
So we've got this file.
Now we've seen canvas and SVG,
both the basic shapes.
Let's have a look at where
we stand in comparison.
So I mentioned canvas draws
immediately into its 2D image.
SVG is a structural format,
as in you add elements into the document.
Basic shapes, pretty much the same.
You can use them both
as background images.
You can embed them both inline.
So we're going on pretty similarly now.
It starts to get different when
we talk about accessibility.
SVG by its nature is a little bit
more accessible because there is
actual structure in your document.
There is content there.
You can side it with CSS, as I mentioned.
And there's authoring tool support.
There's less authoring
tool support for canvas.
But before I give you the
impression that SVG is just better,
there is one very important
use case that canvas wins at,
and that's when either speed
or memory is essential.
And the reason for that is,
SVG has this overhead of adding
elements to the document.
So there is some sort of processing
involved in navigating that tree
and styling it and rendering it.
There's also like the memory overhead.
If you're going to draw a million points,
you don't necessarily want to have
a million objects in your document.
You just want to draw it once
and have it as that 2D image.
And so that's why canvas is used for many
web games because it's great performance.
So that's the basic concepts.
Let's start shaking and baking and
add some animation interactivity.
Now, we've got, to this point,
we could draw a graph
like this pretty easily.
It's just a polyline, a few shapes,
some text, would have done that.
So the next step would have been
make it a little bit better.
This is about the best I can
do because I'm not a designer.
But we could take it one step
further and maybe add some kind
of animation to this chart.
And this would allow
you to do things like,
you know, make it really clear that sort
of one value is bigger than the
other because it animates longer or
just maybe even just looks cooler.
So let's look at how we would add
this kind of animation to our graphic.
So animating with canvas is in fact
very similar to what used to be
called DHTML techniques or what plenty
of JavaScript libraries do today,
which is they render the scene once,
and they run a bit of JavaScript,
and they draw things again,
or they move things across the page,
and just draw again and again.
And you're in charge of
each frame of the animation.
So there's plenty of ways to do this.
Like I said, there's plenty of libraries.
Let's just look at an
example that I came up with.
Imagine I've defined this function that
takes-- that I'm going to-- it's going to
be used to animate a shape in my canvas,
and it takes the starting
value and the ending value,
when I started, and how long I want the
animation to run for.
The first thing I'm going to do is
work out where along-- you know,
how far along the animation I am.
Then I'm going to evaluate
based on that proportion where
the element I want to draw is.
Then I'm going to redraw the scene.
I think it's a bit tricky that, you know,
I've done it once.
I've now got to test, well,
have I hit the end of my animation?
Should I have elapsed?
And if I haven't, then I've got to set up
a JavaScript callback to,
you know, recall this function at a
later state or as soon as I can
to get a smooth animation.
So we're getting a
fair bit of code there,
but it's not so bad.
But if you want to take
it a little bit further,
let's say most animations look
wrong if you're just sort of doing
a straight linear interpolation.
If you look at many of them,
they sort of start slow and speed
up and then maybe end slow again.
So if you want to do something like that,
you're going to have to write extra
code to control basically mapping
that proportion value in time to a
proportion value in the animation.
Maybe you want to animate
a whole bunch of things and
you want to synchronize them.
So you want to have one thing
start and then another thing
start a second later or something.
You have to write extra code
to keep this all arranged.
And then maybe you want to animate some
things that are a bit more complex than
just a single floating point value.
For example, it could be a transform,
which is a matrix.
So it doesn't necessarily always
work to do the interpolation of
all the elements in the matrix.
Or it could be animating between
two different shapes or path types,
polygons.
So you're going to have to write
extra code to do things like that.
But this is all okay.
I mean, if you're familiar with this,
and this technique is, again,
used very often in HTML.
It applies just as well to SVG.
You can use the same
scripting techniques.
But there is a form of SVG animation,
which I think is worth mentioning,
that definitely makes these simple
animations a lot easier to code.
And the way you do animation in
SVG is that instead of doing the frame
base where you're calling yourself,
you just give the
intent of the animation.
I say I want to start from this
value and I'll end at this value,
and the browser's going to be
the one that does the redrawing.
Very similar to the way transitions
and animations work in CSS.
It's pretty easy to add to your file.
So let's imagine I've
got a circle element.
It's drawn at 100,
100 with a radius of 8.
And I just want to animate it.
So I add an animate tag.
I say that the attribute
that I want to animate is CX,
which is the X value of the center point.
And I want to start at the point
100 and go to the point 200.
And my duration is two seconds.
And all I do then is
when the document loads,
that animation's going to fire.
And the browser's going to
control the-- draw this animation.
Pretty easy.
So I want to do more animations.
I just add more animation tags.
So in this case,
I've got two animations.
I first want to animate that
slide along the x-axis and
then move up in the y-axis.
But I want to do it a little bit tricky.
I've added an id attribute
to the first animation.
So I've given it the name slide.
And then the second animation, again,
takes cy from 100 to 80 over two seconds.
But I've told it to
begin at this expression.
And this expression is
the name of the animation,
in case slide, when it ends.
So now what will happen is the
browser will do that animation and
then immediately do the y animation.
This is really cool
because in JavaScript,
you would have to sync this up yourself.
And we can go beyond this.
So that expression, in fact,
can take a little bit
of arithmetic operation.
So in this case,
I've done the same animation.
But I now want to start
two seconds after.
So one Mississippi, two Mississippi.
And you count Mississippi a little
bit faster when you're on stage,
obviously, and then the animation fires.
So you can see that was pretty easy.
There's another type
of sort of animation,
or what I call interaction,
and that's a little bit more
like-- imagine you have a chart,
and you've got a point on the chart,
and you want the user to tap on it and
get a reading of the current value.
So it might pop up this thing.
Pretty common, very cool thing to do.
Let's have a look at how we
would actually do it in Canvas.
Now, one of the problems with Canvas is,
like I said, it's one element in the DOM.
So when you're doing an interaction,
you're only getting the
DOM event on that one element.
So if you touch somewhere on the canvas,
it's the canvas that gets the
event with the next Y location.
And it's up to you to work out where
inside your canvas the shape that
you're actually drawing or whether the
user is tapped on a particular shape.
So here I've written a helper function.
It's going to ask,
is my point in a particular shape?
And I pass in the context and the
XY location of the user touch.
Now, I could do the math to work
out the geometry myself,
but I don't want to do that.
What I'm going to start by is, again,
the same process that
I did to draw the shape.
I'm going to define the geometry with
beginPath and add all the points.
And then I'm going to call as
a helper function on context,
which is isPoint in path.
And that's going to do it.
Now, this seems really easy.
In fact, it is really easy,
except it does get a bit more complicated
when you've got a graphic like this.
So here there's, what is it,
40-odd states or something?
And some of them are pretty complex.
And so every time a
tap or a drag happens,
you're going to have to run that
code for each one of these shapes.
Add all the geometry.
Am I inside?
No.
What about the next one?
Am I inside?
No.
And you can optimize this.
But again, it's pretty cumbersome.
So there is a way to do this
a little bit easier in SVG.
And the reason is that the actual
shapes that you put into the document
are elements in the document.
And they can get event listeners
just the way any other element
in HTML can get event listener.
So here we've got a polygon.
I want to add an event listener to it.
So I get the element by ID myShape.
And I've got the pointer
to this SVG element,
which is a polygon.
And I just add an event listener click.
And it'll call this myClickHandler
when the user clicks on it.
I haven't had to do the hit testing.
It's not going to do it at all.
The browser's done it for me.
I've probably reduced
hundreds of lines of code.
And it's probably faster,
because the browser can optimize this.
So again, I've hinted that there was
some types of animation or
interactivity that SVG's better for.
But there is one type of
animation that Canvas-- well,
there's definitely one type of animation
that Canvas is totally awesome for.
And it's not supported in SVG.
In order to describe that,
I'm going to start by explaining
how you draw images in Canvas.
So the first thing I want to do when
I'm drawing an image is actually
get a reference to the image.
I could have queried for an
image element in my document.
In this case,
I'm just doing it through JavaScript,
so I've created a new image object,
and I've set the source to be some URL.
And we have to imagine here that I've
actually waited for the image to load.
I probably would have added a
load event handler and made sure
the image has actually appeared.
And once I've got that image,
I'm going to call one of three functions,
the three variants of
the drawImage function.
The first one,
if I just call drawImage with that
image and I give an xy location,
it's going to draw the image at its
native resolution into the canvas,
and that's its native resolution.
Let's call that 500 by 500.
The second type is, imagine I don't want
the native resolution,
I give it the image and the
point I want to draw it at,
and this time I've said that I want it to
be 300 pixels wide and 600 pixels high,
and it scaled it.
Now the third type is where
it gets really interesting.
The third type,
again saying I want to draw it,
it's the last four parameters, it's 0, 0,
500, 500, but instead I've got
these extra parameters,
I'm defining a region within
the image that I want to crop.
So in this case I've said that I'm
defining a rectangle that starts
at 230 pixels into the image,
130 pixels down,
and it's 250 pixels square,
and then when I draw that image
it's going to take that cropped
region and draw it at the 500,
500 resolution, so I get this full image.
Now you might be thinking,
well that's not that cool,
but there is some useful things to it.
So the guys that write this game
called The Incident are really kind,
they make great use of this technique.
This is not a web game,
it's a game that's available on the
iOS store and the Mac App store,
but again it gives a great example
of what we're trying to do.
So here is the trailer for the game.
Take a look at the guy
down in the bottom.
So you can see he blinks, looks left,
looks right, says what the,
and then runs out of the way,
he's running around and jumping.
So this is actually how it's done.
They've got one image element,
and then this image has an 8x8 grid of
beautifully hand-drawn pixel frames.
And so let's look at
the row down the bottom,
and you can see there is Frank,
the character, and there's the frames
where he has eyes open,
blinking, looking left, looking right.
What's going on?
And that -- so we could -- then
also scroll up to this row,
and we see the running animation.
So what we would do,
we would use that draw image command
that we did with the cropping,
and we could do things
like if we drew this frame,
this cropped frame,
then this cropped frame,
then this cropped frame.
It looks a bit better when we see it
in full screen with Frank stationary,
so I'm going to draw this, this, this,
this, this,
and you can see Frank's running.
So let's have a look at this in practice.
So again, the guys that wrote the game
kindly gave me the assets to use.
And here I'm going to do it.
You see,
here I am drawing the walking frame.
He's got a bit faster
and he's starting to run.
Again,
I just mocked this up pretty quickly.
Do not take this as any indication
of how it would happen in real life.
Yes, okay, so then we jump.
So, again, I'm just gonna scroll along.
It's slowly speeding up, and...
So, it's failing there.
But anyway,
that's an example of how you would get
that animation in Canvas and how you
would possibly write a similar game,
obviously with a little bit more graphic
design skill than my rectangular squares.
So that's animation and interactivity.
So I think actually by now that I would
consider you know how to draw shapes
and how to add some cool effects that
you're almost like web graphics experts.
But before we send you back,
we want to show you some more
tips and tricks that really
maybe take it to the next level.
I hate using that phrase.
So through this talk,
I've mentioned multiple
times that Canvas is,
in fact, a-- well, it's a vector API,
and you're drawing
resolution independent.
Once it's rendered, it is, in fact,
pixels.
And we sort of describe
that as if it's a bad thing.
Well, actually, it's time to stop
disrespecting the pixels.
Because these effects that we're
going to show here are enabled purely
because Canvas is based in pixels.
[Transcript missing]
So step one is I'm going to
declare a variable called input,
and I'm going to get the currently
rendered version of the canvas.
And I'm going to get the
full width and height.
And then next I'm going to declare
a variable which is my output,
which is where I'm going to
actually set pixel data into.
And again,
I've done it the same width and height,
but I've called
Create Image Data because I'm not
getting it from an existing canvas.
Then I'm just going to iterate
over every pixel in the image.
It doesn't really matter
what the code is here,
what I'm actually doing.
You could do things like
change the brightness,
multiply each one of the RGB values by
add 10% to make it a little bit brighter,
or do some edge detection or whatever.
Or in fact,
you could just set the pixels directly.
You might not be reading them.
But it's important to note here that
because every pixel has four units,
that's why we get this offset where
we're multiplying pixel number i by
4 and then adding 1 and then adding
2 to get 3 to get the alpha version.
So once we've manipulated
that output array,
we've got to draw it back
into the existing context.
And I can either draw it as an
image or I can say put image data,
and I basically replace
whatever's currently in the
canvas with my manipulated data.
Hey, Dean.
Remember last week when you told me,
like, I could manipulate pixels?
Well, now I've written this game,
and I'm drawing the same
image lots of times,
and the performance
isn't quite what I like.
So let's imagine here we're
drawing this shape with canvas,
and you'll notice it
sort of looks simple,
but if we look a little closer,
it is pretty simple,
but it's not completely basic.
You can see it's got a colored stroke,
which is, you know,
we've got to change the curves
into a lot of points and render it.
It's got a couple of different shadings
of red and a gradient in there,
and then it's got this white highlight.
And if you're going to draw
this hundreds of times,
then, you know,
there is actually a fair bit
of processing behind that.
So the way you do this typically
in graphics program is you would
render to an offscreen buffer and do
the curve to pixel operation once,
and then draw that
pixels into the canvas.
And as I mentioned
before with the IE9 demo,
drawing images into
canvases is super fast now.
So this is a really great technique.
So let's say I'm going
to draw this heart.
I know that I'm going to draw it lots
of times at 100 pixels by 100 pixels.
So I'm going to create
a new canvas element.
I'm not going to put this
canvas into the document.
I'm just keeping it in
memory in JavaScript.
I set its width and height to
be 100 pixels by 100 pixels.
And then I get the context
for that new canvas element,
and I'm going to call
my function drawHeart,
taking that context and the size.
So now that I've got this,
I've now got this canvas object
that's my rasterization of the heart,
then I can just use it as drawImage the
same way we showed with previous slides,
at some XY location.
Now,
it's important to remember that you are
actually rasterizing that graphic so that
if you decide to draw it at some other
size other than 100-100 in this case,
what you define it to be,
you probably get some kind of artifact,
and that might not be good.
Or if you potentially want
to transform it or rotate it.
But this is a great performance tip,
so well worth using if
it does suit your code.
So now you've really got
this attitude as the expert.
So, "Hey, Dean, you let me draw these
awesome canvas things,
but, like, once the page is gone,
the image is gone,
and I want to save that image."
I'm glad you asked.
So the Canvas element has one method.
It's very simple,
two data URL and you pass a mime type.
In this case,
I've said image ping because what
this does is gives you back a string
which is an encoded version of a ping
file that represents that Canvas.
Pretty simple call.
What can you do with it
once you've done that?
What would you do?
So now that you have this string,
it's just like any other
string in JavaScript.
So I could potentially put it in local
storage so that the next time the
user comes to your page or my site,
I can extract it and they don't
have to recreate the image.
I could send it back to the server.
It's important to note here that there is
some security restrictions there because
obviously a Canvas can have access to
images that are from a different domain.
So if you do draw images from a
different domain or data from a
different domain into a Canvas,
you can't get the image
data back out of it.
But if you could,
you could send it back to a server.
Or lastly,
this seems like a pretty obscure case,
is you could actually create a new
image element and set that -- set the
source attribute of that image element
to the data URL that you just created.
And you're thinking, well, wait a minute.
I've got the image in the page.
So why would I want to do this?
So this, I've got basically a
full screen canvas here,
and let's say I want to draw on it.
So here I'm just drawing some radial
gradients with a little compositing mode.
And I can actually-- because
it's a scripted image,
I can actually-- I've taken a record
of what I drew so I could replay it,
for example, to the user.
Oops.
So let's do something cool.
I want to write--
So, okay, now I've got this.
Now I want to actually
make use of this image,
so I'm going to hit save.
Now what I did is this technique
here where I've created a new image
element with the value of the canvas,
and now, thanks to iOS,
I can tap and hold on
this image and save it.
[Transcript missing]
Boom.
And the next session
we'll get a nice surprise.
I said both.
So we, we,
I talked about manipulating pixels.
Let's have a look at this.
You don't actually,
one of the things with this,
being able to manipulate the
pixels is the sort of range
of possibilities is endless.
You can actually do whatever you want.
So here's an example.
And in this case I've got a video element
in the page and this is the canvas.
And where I call draw
image on an image element,
I can actually still call draw image.
So I can actually draw image
on a video element and it's
going to draw the current frame
of the video into the canvas.
So here it is drawing the feature.
Now, you notice that there's a
lot of white background here.
So I can actually check the,
check the pixels and detect when I'm
getting a block of white images and in
fact composite that over another image.
In this case they're on,
the iPad is floating in midair in Hawaii.
So I can do other things.
It was easy to find those gray images.
I could actually maybe now
manipulate the pixels here.
I've upped the green.
And I have risked my career by
making Phil Schiller look like Shrek.
But I can go even further than this.
I can sort of do a
whole of mirrors effect.
So here I am getting the pixels.
It'll start over again.
And I'm drawing them again multiple
times with sort of varying opacity.
Yeah,
you can do all sorts of stuff with this.
It's pretty cool.
So that's finished section three,
and so now it's what you have learned.
You've done some basic shapes.
We've done some interaction activity,
and then we've shown that you can
actually do some amazing stuff if
you take it a little bit further,
even though the operations that
enable this are quite simple.
So to wrap up, so maybe some of you came
to this talk thinking,
oh, well,
I really hope that he talks about
something and tells me which of these
two technologies is the winner because
there's people on the web that say,
oh, this sucks and that.
Well, unfortunately,
the answer is they're both winners,
and it's really more a case of
looking at the problem that you
have and asking questions like,
does it need to be accessible?
Do I have programmers that
are more familiar with
JavaScript than maybe designers?
Or do I need to style it with CSS?
But the real point is that, you know,
you've got these two
technologies that are really,
as far as 2D graphics are,
are almost limitless.
You can do whatever you want.
And if you combine that with the
amazing speed increase that's
available on Safari Online and iOS 5,
now, like,
the web platform in terms of graphics
is really -- we're looking forward to
seeing what stuff you come up with.
So there's some other sessions.
Unfortunately, the iBooks one,
which is a place where you can
use lots of these technologies,
was earlier, so you'll have to catch
that in the replay.
But coming up next right here
is how to use -- what's new
in CSS effects and animations.
We're not competitive here,
but we like to think in the
Safari team we have the best
evangelist that Apple has to offer,
and that's Vicky Murley,
who you'll see on stage in a minute.
Both of these technologies
are from the W3C,
so while there's the
Safari Developer Center on
developer.applecom,
there's also the specifications on W3C,
and the joke I always make
is they will come out with an
English language translation one day.
And with that...